---
layout: item
title: Kathy Acker Performance Reading 1986
manifest_name: kathy-acker-performance-reading-1986
permalink: kathy-acker-performance-reading-1986
external_manifest_url: 

---
<!-- Add an essay or interpretive material below this line,
using HTML or markdown.  Do not modify this file above this line -->

This artifact is a video recording of a performance reading given by Kathy Acker at the Montreal bar Foufounes Électriques in 1986. The recording is part of the Alan Lord fonds and the video and audio tapes are held at Concordia University’s Special Collections. The recording is split in two parts. In the first, Acker reads two excerpts from her novel *Empire of the Senseless* published two years later. In the second, the camera is reopened to capture what appears to be an encore. I am interested in this second segment where the presence of the crowd is more felt and heard then it was in the first part. 

## Layers

I have divided my annotations into four layers: transcript, speaker, audience, and environment. In the “transcript” layer appears what Acker reads from the pages she is holding. “Speaker” serves to collect what Acker says to her audience when she is not reading. Ervin Goffman, in his *Forms of Talk*, calls this “fresh talk” (171). Those are moments when the speaker’s formulation appears responsive to the present occasion and to the present listeners. The “audience” layer is used to gather the sounds coming from the crowd that seem to be produced as a form of interaction with the speaker’s performance. Those sounds are mainly vocal, by which I mean produced by a human larynx and inclusive of both words and non-linguistic sounds. This layer also tracks sounds of applause as non-vocal interactional sounds. The last layer, “environment,” allows me to identify non-vocal sounds coming from the manipulation of furniture and objects which I qualify, following Goffman, as “noise” (181). Noise happens when communication occurs. Noises are signals that impair the transmission of the intended signal, here Acker’s performance reading. Yet, in my analysis, I will argue that those noises may also be a form of interaction with the performance, or its deliberate disruption. 

## Context
### Les Foufounes Électriques

First, I want to situate Acker’s performance within Montreal’s artistic scene in the 80s, within feminist debates about pornography, and within punk and avant-garde performances. Acker’s performance is part of the Tuesday series at Les Foufounes Électriques (also known as “Foufs”) presented by the short-lived magazine *L’Oeil rechargeable: L’organe de la nouvelle culture* and *Ultimatum*. During the 1980s and 1990s, the bar situated in the Faubourg Saint-Laurent neighborhood is considered a major part of Montreal’s underground scene where beatniks, hippies and punks meet to attend music shows and poetry readings (Palardy 16). It is thus an appropriate location to welcome Acker and her work which are characterized as shocking and scandalous by a Radio-Canada report announcing the event (“Reportage Radio Canada”). Alan Lord, representing Les Foufounes Électriques, is interviewed and describes Acker as the “priestess of the new Beat Generation \[and\] of the punk literatures.”

### Bilingualism

Radio-Canada’s report locates Acker’s performance at the confluence of many cultural manifestations of the 1980s. Acker’s visit in Montreal is an example of a bilingual experience that refuses to indulge in the mutual exclusion of the “two solitudes.” Acker’s coming is covered by francophone media such as *Le Devoir* and Radio-Canada (Royer C–2). The latter introduces Acker by a single sentence—chosen for its shock value—from a video excerpt of a previous performance where she says: “I quickly chose a raped body over a mutilated or a dead one.” ("Reportage Radio Canada"). Acker’s sentence is accompanied by a somewhat flawed translation: “J’ai rapidement choisi d’être violée, plutôt que d’être mutilée ou tuée.” Translated back to English, we could read: "I quickly chose *to be raped* rather than being mutilated or killed.” This imperfect attempt at rendering Acker’s words accessible to French speakers situates the writer’s visit at a time when no French translation of her work was available. Yet there is an interest for her work and her persona in Montreal’s underground scene, which gathers at the Foufs where the anglophone and the francophone musical and artistic communities meet (Palardy 55). 

### Pornography

Later in this same Radio-Canada report, Acker is interviewed at the Foufs in front of a wall covered with graffiti where is written in big letters “NO PORN NO ART” ("Reportage Radio Canada"). The 1980s are years of internal conflict within different feminist movements that strongly disagree on the status of pornography both in the US and in Canada. Acker troubles the idea that feminism needs to get rid of pornography and of sex work with it. Acker appropriates the explicit and violent character of pornographic representations to dismantle binaries that uphold the norms producing gendered violence while claiming to prevent it (Ioanes 175). Her representation of sexuality follows her logic of contradiction according to which opposite terms are to be held together rather than being portrayed as mutually exclusive. In Acker’s novels, consent doesn’t exclude violence and there are no “good” or “bad” victims of sexual violence. Consent needs to be constantly renegotiated by her characters and by her readers and listeners (Ioanes 180, 183). 

## Analysis

Here I would like to offer an analysis both on Acker’s performance and on the audience’s response to it. I am interested in “aurality,” how the audience listens, and in “orality,” how the audience speak back to the performance reading (MacArthur 43). I attempt to listen to the forms of listening and sounding of the crowd. Such listening is also feeling for embodiment and looking for situatedness. While I can situate Acker’s voice in a female queer bisexual white body located at the confluent of punk, feminist, avant-garde, and academic streams, I can only ask questions about the position of the members of the audience. 

### Who is listening? 

While attempting to label the different vocal and non-vocal sounds coming from the audience, I found myself asking the acousmatic question: “Who/what is this?” The term acousmatic designates a sound whose cause is invisible to the listener. I was thus attending to the possible causes of the sounds or, when that wasn’t possible, to their quality. In her introduction to *The Race of Sound: Listening, Timbre and Vocality in African American Music*, Nina Sun Eidsheim shifts the acousmatic question to “*Who am I, who hears this?*” (24). Eidsheim reveals that the listener is constructing the sonic event with their own cultural and social biases. Both Eidsheim and Dylan Robinson in his *Hungry Listening: Resonant Theory for Indigenous Sound Studies* ask listeners to recognize their own “listening positionality” as well as the forms of entrainment shaping their listening (Robinson 3; Eidsheim 30). I understand my fluid gender as a non-oppositional way of knowing and living with contradictions. This entrainment, coming from feminist and Indigenous perspectives (such as the one of Michi Saagiig scholar and artist Leanne Betasamosake Simpson), is in dialogue and opposition with my entrainment as a franco-québécois settler living on unceded Indigenous land in Tiohtià:ke (Montreal) and evolving in academic structures. It is with these interlocking positionalities that I come to the recording. 

### Performance reading

In this recording, Acker is reading words from a page. She is reading excerpts in prose of her then upcoming novel *Empire of the Senseless*. Michael Turner’s talk “Three Readings: Camera, Tape and Sound,” frames one of Acker’s performances as a “literary reading,” which implies “words spoken from a page, as opposed to those that come remembered.” However, Acker’s reading takes place in a “performance space” (Turner). His definition suggests that this type of rendition is inhabiting a liminal space, being both a reading and a performance.

Acker’s reading is itself marginal within the frame of literary readings where poetry readings have received much more critical attention. In “Monotony, the Churches of Poetry Reading, and Sound Studies,” Marit J. MacArthur maintains that the term “poetry reading” marginalizes performance by giving preeminence to the written text conceived of as autonomous (43). A “neutral” style of reading, characterized by sameness of tone or pitch and resembling Judeo-Christian services, has become the default in academic readings (39, 42). The term “reading,” and its “neutral” style, is thus a way to obscure the fact that *reading out loud is always of form of performance*. Thus, such reading *performs* neutrality to appeal to the authority of the written text, of the academic objectivity standards, and of the Judeo-Christian religious institutions. I would therefore like to frame Acker’s reading as a *performance reading* which implies a written text, a style of reading (or delivery), a speaker, and an audience present at the same time in the same place.

### Gender performance

In Acker’s artistic performance are also woven the threads of gender performance. In *Gender Trouble* Judith Butler develops their theory of gender performativity by thinking with artistic performances of drag. Drag plays with the non-correspondence between biological sex, gender identity, and gender performance (175). Such non-correspondence is not however limited to drag and can be applied to many performances in being. In Acker’s introduction to the excerpt she is about to read, I argue that she is performing different gender characteristics to negotiate the distance between her gender identity and the social expectations regarding a person assigned female at birth. 

As Acker begins her introduction, she is interrupted by a member of the audience who tells her that she has a “nice diction.” Acker doesn’t understand what is being said and makes this person repeat several times. She is then using a higher pitch to perform femininity, gentleness, and generosity to encourage her interlocutor. The video shows her adopting a bent posture, bringing her shoulders to the front in a gesture of compliance while also bending her head backward and sideways to signify both her openness to the question and her active attempt to understand it. When other members of the crowd intervene and Acker finally understands the comment, she first responds by being polite: “Oh, thank you sir, yeah.” While answering she makes a curtsy: she bends her knees and extends her arms as if holding the sides of a long dress, thus reproducing the traditional gendered gesture of greeting. While performing this gesture, Acker also makes a comic sound by pinching her bottom lip with her front teeth and sucking in a bit of air. She then changes to a lower pitch, speaks louder and very distinctly, even spelling out the title of the section she will be reading: “This is called Male, M.A.L.E.” While spelling, she seems to be directing her sharp gaze towards the man who just “complimented” her. She then redirects her attention to the pages she is holding as her face goes through a series of light spasms during which she blinks vigorously. 

This man’s “speech act,” to borrow Butler’s words, constitute Acker as a feminine subject, and her early reaction—a reflex of compliance often necessary to navigate a misogynistic society—reinforces this attribution (“Rethinking Vulnerability and Resistance” 16). Yet, Acker parodies femininity by making a curtsy while producing a funny noise that frustrates standards of politeness and bienséance. She also parodies masculinity by performing authority in speaking loudly and distinctly while looking disapprovingly to the man who made the comment.     

### Listening to the relationship between speaker and audience

Acker’s vulnerability to the audience’s comments mirrors the audience’s vulnerability to the violence of her text. While it is possible for readers to close a book that shocks them (Ioanes 183), listening to a performance in a collective space renders the audience more “captive” (MacArthur 42). In his work about film, Michel Chion argues that sound is even more intrusive than images or, in this case, written words. Since ears have no eyelid to shield them, and since hearing is omnidirectional, it is harder to protect oneself from sounds one doesn’t want to hear than from images one doesn’t want to see (Chion 43). 

In her article “Shock and Consent in a Feminist Avant-Garde: Kathleen Hanna Reads Kathy Acker” Anna Ioanes analyses how readers may negotiate their consent in relation with the violence in Acker’s texts. She argues that Acker’s avant-garde aesthetic is designed to shock audiences to create varied responses such as emotional and critical engagement, identification and distance, joy and rage. (Ioanes 176–77) This aesthetic of shock allows Acker to prompt her “feminist readers to reflect on the complex nature of consent and subsequently to think and feel the violation of shock alongside pleasure, absorption, and recognition” (193).

In Acker’s reading at the Foufs however, the author is not exclusively in the presence of feminist listeners, as the comment of the man about her diction signals. The listeners’ engagement is not necessarily self-reflexive, it might not allow them to recognize their own position within systems of privilege and oppression. In this sense, the performance is not a conversion to feminist thinking but rather an experience of both enjoyment and discomfort which might lead to further reflections (Ioanes 177, MacArthur 42). 

### Formulating affinities and defiances throught discomfort

Members of the audience are negotiating their shock through non-verbal forms of engagement such as laughter and the noisy manipulation of objects. The laughs in the crowd sometimes accompany moments of sexual violence. In Sianne Ngai’s *Ugly Feelings*, she maintains that laugh and boredom—which could be signalled by the manipulation of objects creating noise—brings us “to ask what ways of responding our culture makes available to us, and under what conditions” (262). Producing noise might be a way for auditors to anchor themselves back in their body through tactile and auditory stimulation, to create a distance with the verbal performance, and to produce a counter discourse. Noise can challenge Acker’s authority as a speaker talking to a silent audience. I believe this is an effect that her performance wishes to provoke through shock. Acker’s performance neither invites a silent crowd (such as the passive audience of academic poetry readings) nor a completely supportive one (like the Beats’ friendly and evangelical-like auditory) (MacArthur 56). The dynamic between Acker and her audience is neither framed by formalism nor facilitated by friendship. Yet it is maybe in this situation of discomfort that both audience and speaker are brough to formulate questions and weave affinities.

